---
title: "Distinctive features of the oropharyngeal microbiome in Inuit of Nunavik and correlations of mild to moderate bronchial obstruction with dysbiosis"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-10-03_Sci-Rep
excerpt: 'This study' 
date: 2025-01-07
venue: 'Scientific Reports'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-43821-4'
citation: 'Flahaut, M., Leprohon, P., Pham, N. P., Gingras, H., Bourbeau, J., Papadopoulou, B., Maltais, F. & Ouellette, M. (2023). &quot;Distinctive features of the oropharyngeal microbiome in Inuit of Nunavik and correlations of mild to moderate bronchial obstruction with dysbiosis&quot.; Scientific Reports, 13(1), 16622.'
---

Inuit of Nunavik are coping with living conditions that can influence respiratory health. Our objective was to investigate associations between respiratory health in Inuit communities and their airway microbiome. Oropharyngeal samples were collected during the Qanuilirpitaa? 2017 Inuit Health Survey and subjected to metagenomic analyses. Participants were assigned to a bronchial obstruction group or a control group based on their clinical history and their pulmonary function, as monitored by spirometry. The Inuit microbiota composition was found to be distinct from other studied populations. Within the Inuit microbiota, differences in diversity measures tend to distinguish the two groups. Bacterial taxa found to be more abundant in the control group included candidate probiotic strains, while those enriched in the bronchial obstruction group included opportunistic pathogens. Crossing taxa affiliation method and machine learning consolidated our finding of distinct core microbiomes between the two groups. More microbial metabolic pathways were enriched in the control participants and these were often involved in vitamin and anti-inflammatory metabolism, while a link could be established between the enriched pathways in the disease group and inflammation. Overall, our results suggest a link between microbial abundance, interactions and metabolic activities and respiratory health in the Inuit population.