---
title: Antimicrobial Activity of a Synthetic Brevibacillin Analog Against Multidrug-Resistant <i>Campylobacter</i> spp
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-05-13_Int-J-Mol-Sci
excerpt: This study evaluated the antimicrobial activity of the synthetic lipopeptide brevibacillin Thr1 against 44 clinical <i>Campylobacter</i> spp. isolates, more than half of which were multidrug-resistant. The peptide exhibited bactericidal activity against all these isolates, and no resistance to it could be induced, highlighting its potential as an alternative treatment for antibiotic-resistant <i>Campylobacter</i> infections.  
date: 2025-05-13
venue: International journal of molecular sciences
paperurl: https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/26/10/4657
citation: Abdallah, K., Fliss, O., Pham, N. P., Guay, L. D., Gingras, H., Godin, C., Leprohon, P., Biron, E., Fliss, I. & Ouellette, M. (2025). &quot;Antimicrobial Activity of a Synthetic Brevibacillin Analog Against Multidrug-Resistant <i>Campylobacter</i> spp&quot;. <i>International journal of molecular sciences</i>, 26(10), 4657.
---

*Campylobacter* spp. is one of the most prevalent causes of zoonotic foodborne infections associated with diarrhea in humans. The growing threat of antibiotic resistance calls for innovative approaches. The antimicrobial lipopeptide brevibacillin produced by *Brevibacillus laterosporus* and its synthetic analog brevibacillin Thr1 showed promising activity against *Salmonella* and *E. coli*. The latter is a 1602.13 Da positively charged (+3) synthetic peptide of 13 residues that showed reduced cytotoxicity (IC50 of 32.2 µg/mL against Caco-2 cells) and hemolytic activity (1.2% hemolysis at 128 µg/mL) compared to the native peptide. It contains an N-terminal L-isoleucic fatty acid chain and four non-proteinogenic amino acids and ends with valinol at its C-terminus. One key structural modification is the substitution of α,β-dehydrobutyric acid with threonine. We investigated the antimicrobial potential of the synthetic brevibacillin Thr1 analog against a collection of 44 clinical *Campylobacter*spp. that were obtained from two reference laboratories. Susceptibility testing revealed marked resistance to ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, and ampicillin among the strains, with more than half expressing a multidrug-resistant phenotype. The genomes of the 44 strains were sequenced to study the genes responsible for their antimicrobial resistance. Tetracycline resistance was associated with *tet(O)*, ciprofloxacin resistance with mutations in *gyrA* and regulatory sequences modulating the expression of an efflux system, and aminoglycoside resistance with genes of the *aph* family. The brevibacillin Thr1 analog was produced by chemical synthesis, and evaluation of its activity against a subset of clinical strains by microdilution revealed minimum inhibitory concentration and minimum bactericidal concentration ranging from 8 µg/mL to 64 µg/mL. The peptide was active against multidrug-resistant isolates with a bactericidal effect. Of note, despite numerous attempts, it proved impossible to select *Campylobacter* spp. for resistance to the brevibacillin Thr1 analog. These results underline the potential of lipopeptides, notably brevibacillin, as antimicrobial alternatives against antibiotic-resistant *Campylobacter* bacterial infections.