---
title: "Comparative genomic analysis of <i>Brevibacterium</i> strains: insights into key genetic determinants involved in adaptation to the cheese habitat and generation of functional properties"
collection: talks
type: Poster
permalink: /talks/2017-06-04_BAGECO
excerpt: Poster in English
venue: The 14th Symposium on Bacterial Genetics and Ecology (BAGECO 14)
date: 2017-06-04
location: Aberdeen, United Kingdom
---

# Language: 
English

# Abstract:
## Scientific question and context:
Ripening cultures containing *Brevibacterium* strains are used in surface-ripened cheeses for their ability to produce aroma compounds and red-orange pigments. However, these strains are frequently outcompeted by the resident "house flora", due to unsufficient fitness in the cheese surface habitat. In order to improve the strategies for selecting *Brevibacterium* strains for ripening cultures, it is important to better understand the mechanisms involved in their ability to grow on the cheese surface. This can be investigated by genomic analyses.

## Methods: 
We sequenced the genome of 13 *Brevibacterium* strains, including 11 strains isolated from cheeses. We performed then comparative analyses of these genomes and of 10 others genomes from *Brevibacterium* stains already present in public databases.

## Results:
Analysis of the gene repertoire showed that *Brevibacterium* strains are well-equipped in genes involved in the catabolism of energy compounds present in cheese: galactose, D-galactonate, lactate, ethanol, acetate and citrate. Most strains, especially those isolated from cheeses, encoded secreted lipases and the enzymes involved in the catabolism of fatty acids and glycerol. Several secreted proteases that are probably able to degrade caseins were also identified, as well as key enzymes from amino acid catabolism. Numerous genes involved in iron acquisition and osmotic stress resistance were identified and part of them resulted from inter-genus horizontal gene transfer. The *Brevibacterium* genomes also encoded several types of bacteriocin biosynthesis genes.

## Conclusion:
This study showed that many *Brevibacterium* strains have the potential to use key energy compounds from cheese, to adapt themselve to the high salt content and to the low iron availability, and to inhibit other strains. Measurement of expression of these genes in various cheeses manufacturing processes and biotic or abiotic conditions will help us to better understand the behaviour of *Brevibacterium* during the ripening of cheese and therefore to devise improved strategies for strain selection mixed culture design.
