---
title: "Microbial adaptation in cheese: Tales of <i>Brevibacterium</i>"
collection: talks
type: Conference
permalink: /talks/2019-03-27_MICROBES
excerpt: Conference in English
venue: Paris-Saclay MICROBES day
date: 2019-03-27
location: Gif-sur-Yvette,, France
---

# Language: 
English

# Abstract:
The objective of our study was to better understand the molecular mechanisms of microbial adaptation to the cheese habitat by functional genomic approaches using *Brevibacterium* as a model microorganism. This bacterium is widely used for the manufacturing of cheese but its growth on the cheese surface is sometimes difficult to control.

Comparative genomic analysis of 23 *Brevibacterium* strains, including 12 strains isolated from cheeses, revealed differences in genetic determinants involved in the growth on the cheese surface. Some of them are correlated to strain phylogeny and others are the result of gene transfers, especially those involved in iron acquisition and bacteriocin biosynthesis. We identified genomic islands corresponding to transfers of genes involved in iron acquisition between cheese-associated *Brevibacterium* strains and cheese-associated strains belonging to other genera. We also detected a conjugative transposon encoding bacteriocin production, which is present in cheese-associated *Brevibacterium* strains as well as in a cheese-associated *Corynebacterium* strain.

Functional study of biotic interactions between *Brevibacterium* and *Hafnia alvei*, another cheese-ripening bacterium, was performed in a model cheese developed in this study. By coupling microbial, biochemical and transcriptomic (RNA-seq) analyses, we revealed several interaction mechanisms between these bacteria. These concern, in particular, iron acquisition, proteolysis, lipolysis, sulfur metabolism and D-galactonate catabolism. Our findings suggest that in the mutualistic relationship between some *Brevibacterium* strains and *H. alvei*, the latter stimulates *Brevibacterium* growth by the secretion of siderophores, which can be used by *Brevibacterium* to capture iron more efficiently. In return, *Brevibacterium* secretes lipases and proteases, which degrade cheese caseins and triglycerides into energetic substrates that stimulate *H. alvei* growth. This type of interaction is interesting to consider in the formulation of ripening cultures because it results in a better ability of all partners to colonize the cheese, and thus to generate the desired technological properties.
